Getting started
===============

Page Templates are a web page generation tool. In this part, we'll go
through their basics and show how to use them in your web site to create
dynamic web pages easily.

The goal of Page Templates is natural workflow. A designer will use a
WYSIWYG HTML editor to create a template, then a programmer will edit it
to make it part of an application. If required, the designer can load
the template *back* into his editor and make further changes to its
structure and appearance. By taking reasonable steps to preserve the
changes made by the programmer, he will not disrupt the application.

Page Templates aim at this goal by adopting three principles:

#. Play nicely with editing tools.

#. What you see is very similar to what you get.

#. Keep code out of templates, except for structural logic.

A Page Template is like a model of the pages that it will generate. In
particular, it is a valid HTML/XHTML page. Since HTML is highly
structured, and WYSIWYG editors carefully preserve this structure, there
are strict limits on the ways in which the programmer can change a page
and still respect the first principle.

Although Page Templates are suited for programmers and designers who
need to work together to create dynamic web pages, they form the basis
for most of Plone's pages, so you should learn them a bit at least, if
you need to customize the Plone look or layout. Moreover, they can be
simpler to use and understand than the alternative, DTML.

Why Yet Another Template Language?
----------------------------------

There are plenty of template systems out there, some of them quite
popular, such as ASP, JSP, and PHP. Since the beginning, Zope has come
with a template language called DTML. Why invent another?

First, none of these template systems are aimed at HTML designers. Once
a page has been converted into a template, it is invalid HTML, making it
difficult to work with outside of the application. Each of them violates
the first or second principle of Zope Page Templates to one degree or
another. Programmers should not "hijack" the work of the designers and
turn HTML into software. XMLC, part of the Enhydra project, shares our
goal, but requires the programmer to write substantial amounts of Java
support code for each template.

Second, all of these systems suffer from failure to separate
presentation, logic, and content (data). Their violations of the third
principle decrease the scalability of content management and website
development efforts that use these systems.

Applying The Principles
-----------------------

Page Templates use the **Template Attribute Language (TAL)**. TAL
consists of special tag attributes. For example, a dynamic page title
might look like this:

::

          <title tal:content="context/title">Page Title</title>

The ``tal:content`` attribute is a TAL statement. Since it has an XML
namespace (the ``tal:`` part) most editing tools will not complain that
they don't understand it, and will not remove it. It will not change the
structure or appearance of the template when loaded into a WYSIWYG
editor or a web browser. The name ``content`` indicates that it will set
the content of the ``title`` tag, and the value "context/title" is an
expression providing the text to insert into the tag.

To the HTML designer using a WYSIWYG tool, this is perfectly valid HTML,
and shows up in the editor looking the way a title should look. The
designer, not caring about the application details of TAL, only sees a
*mockup* of the dynamic template, complete with dummy values like "Page
Title" for the title of the document.

When this template is saved in Zope and viewed by a user, Zope turns
this static content into dynamic content and replaces "Page Title" with
whatever "context/title" resolves to. In this case, "context/title"
resolves to the title of the object to which to the template is applied.
This substitution is done dynamically, when the template is viewed.

This example also demonstrates the second principle. When you view the
template in an editor, the title text will act as a placeholder for the
dynamic title text. The template provides an example of how generated
documents will look.

There are template commands for replacing entire tags, their contents,
or just some of their attributes. You can repeat a tag several times or
omit it entirely. You can join parts of several templates together, and
specify simple error handling. All of these capabilities are used to
generate document structures. You **can't** create subroutines or
classes, write loops or multi-way tests, or easily express complex
algorithms. For these tasks, you should use Python.

The template language is deliberately not as powerful and
general-purpose as it could be. It is meant to be used inside of a
framework (such as Zope) in which other objects handle business logic
and tasks unrelated to page layout.

For instance, template language would be useful for rendering an invoice
page, generating one row for each line item, and inserting the
description, quantity, price, and so on into the text for each row. It
would not be used to create the invoice record in a database or to
interact with a credit card processing facility.

Creating a Page Template
------------------------

If you design pages, you will probably use FTP or WebDAV instead of the
Zope Management Interface (ZMI) to create and edit Page Templates, or
you will be developing templates on the filesystem for later
installation. If you're not the Zope site owner, ask your Zope
administrator for instructions. For the very small examples in this
article, it is much easier to use the ZMI. For more information on using
FTP or WebDAV with Zope, see `The Zope
Book <http://www.zope.org/Documentation/Books/ZopeBook/current/ExternalTools.stx>`_
or Jeffrey Shell's `WebDAV
article <http://www.zope.org/Documentation/Articles/WebDAV>`_.

You may also use `Emacs <http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/>`_,
`cadaver <http://www.webdav.org/cadaver/>`_, or some other client, but
if you are a Zope administrator or a programmer, you will probably use
the ZMI anyway at least occasionally. See the Zope Book for instructions
on setting up Zope to to work with various clients.

Use your web browser to log into the Zope management interface as you
normally would with Zope. Choose a Folder (the root is fine) and pick
"Page Template" from the drop-down add list. Type "simple\_page" in the
add form's ``Id`` field, then push the "Add and Edit" button.

You should now see the main editing page for the new Page Template. The
title is blank, the content-type is ``text/html``, and the default
template text is in the editing area.

Now you will create a very simple dynamic page. Type the words "a Simple
Page" in the ``Title`` field. Then, edit the template's body text to
look like this:

::

          This is <b tal:replace="template/title">the Title</b>.

Now push the "Save Changes" button. The edit page should show a message
confirming that your changes have been saved. IfÂ  an error message
appears above the code area, or some text starting with
``<-- Page Template Diagnostics`` is added to the template, then check
to make sure you typed the example correctly and save it again. You
don't need to erase the error comment: once the error is corrected it
will go away.

Click on the ``Test`` tab. You should see a mostly blank page with "This
is a Simple Page." at the top.

Back up, then click on the "Browse HTML source" link under the
content-type field. This will show you the *unrendered* source of the
template. You should see "This is **the Title**." Back up again, so that
you are ready to edit the example further.

Simple Expressions
------------------

The text "template/title" in your simple Page Template is a *path
expression*. This the most commonly used of the expression types defined
by the TAL Expression Syntax (TALES). It fetches the ``title`` property
of the template. Here are some other common path expressions:

-  request/URL: The URL of the current web request.

-  user/getUserName: The authenticated user's login name.

-  container/objectIds: A list of Ids of the objects in the same Folder
   as the template.

Every path starts with a variable name. If the variable contains the
value you want, you stop there. Otherwise, you add a slash (``/``) and
the name of a sub-object or property. You may need to work your way
through several sub-objects to get to the value you're looking for.

There is a small built in set of variables, such as ``request`` and
``user``, that will be listed and described later. You will also learn
how to define your own variables.

Inserting Text
--------------

In your "simple\_page" template, you used the ``tal:replace`` statement
on a bold tag. When you tested it, it replaced the entire tag with the
title of the template. When you browsed the source, instead, you saw the
template text in bold. We used a bold tag in order to highlight the
difference.

In order to place dynamic text inside of other text, you typically use
``tal:replace`` on a ``span`` tag. Add the following lines to your
example:

::

          <br>
          The URL is <span tal:replace="request/URL">URL</span>.

The ``span`` tag is structural, not visual, so this looks like "The URL
is URL." when you view the source in an editor or browser. When you view
the rendered version, it may look something like:

::

          <br>
          The URL is http://localhost:8080/simple_page.

Remember to take care when editing not to destroy the ``span`` or place
formatting tags such as ``b`` or ``font`` inside of it, since they would
also be replaced.

If you want to insert text into a tag but leave the tag itself alone,
you use ``tal:content``. To set the title of your example page to the
template's title property, add the following lines above the other text:

::

          <head>
            <title tal:content="template/title">The Title</title>
          </head>

If you open the "Test" tab in a new window, the window's title will be
"a Simple Page".

Repeating Structures
--------------------

Now you will add some context to your page, in the form of a list of the
objects that are in the same Folder. You will make a table that has a
numbered row for each object, and columns for the id, meta-type, and
title. Add these lines to the bottom of your example template:

::

          <table border="1" width="100%">
            <tr>
              <th>#</th><th>Id</th><th>Meta-Type</th><th>Title</th>
            </tr>
            <tr tal:repeat="item container/objectValues">
              <td tal:content="repeat/item/number">#</td>
              <td tal:content="item/id">Id</td>
              <td tal:content="item/meta_type">Meta-Type</td>
              <td tal:content="item/title">Title</td>
            </tr>
          </table>

The ``tal:repeat`` statement on the table row means "repeat this row for
each item in my container's list of object values". The repeat statement
puts the objects from the list into the ``item`` variable one at a time,
and makes a copy of the row using that variable. The value of "item/id"
in each row is the Id of the object for that row.

You can use any name you like for the "item" variable, as long as it
starts with a letter and contains only letters, numbers, and underscores
(``_``). It only exists in the <tr> tag; If you tried to use it above or
below that tag you would get an error.

You also use the ``tal:repeat`` variable name to get information about
the current repetition. By placing it after the builtin variable
``repeat`` in a path, you can access the repetition count starting from
zero (``index``), from one (``number``), from "A" (``Letter``), and in
several other ways. So, the expression ``repeat/item/number`` is ``1``
in the first row, ``2`` in the second row, and so on.

Since one ``tal:repeat`` loop can be placed inside of another, more than
one can be active at the same time. This is why you must write
``repeat/item/number`` instead of just ``repeat/number``. You must
specify which loop you are interested in by including the loop name.

Conditional Elements
--------------------

View the template, and you'll notice that the table is very dull
looking. Let's improve it by shading alternate rows. Copy the second row
of the table, then edit the code so that it looks like this:

::

          <table border="1" width="100%">
            <tr>
              <th>#</th><th>Id</th><th>Meta-Type</th><th>Title</th>
            </tr>
            <tbody tal:repeat="item container/objectValues">
              <tr bgcolor="#EEEEEE" tal:condition="repeat/item/even">
                <td tal:content="repeat/item/number">#</td>
                <td tal:content="item/id">Id</td>
                <td tal:content="item/meta_type">Meta-Type</td>
                <td tal:content="item/title">Title</td>
              </tr>
              <tr tal:condition="repeat/item/odd">
                <td tal:content="repeat/item/number">#</td>
                <td tal:content="item/id">Id</td>
                <td tal:content="item/meta_type">Meta-Type</td>
                <td tal:content="item/title">Title</td>
              </tr>
            </tbody>
          </table>

The ``tal:repeat`` has not changed, you have just moved it onto the new
``tbody`` tag. This is a standard HTML tag meant to group together the
body rows of a table, which is how you are using it. There are two rows
in the body, with identical columns, and one has a grey background.

View the template's source, and you see both rows. If you had not added
the ``tal:condition`` statements to the rows, then the template would
generate both rows for every item, which is not what you want. The
``tal:condition`` statement on the first row ensures that it is only
included on even-indexed repetitions, while the second row's condition
only lets it appear in odd-indexed repetitions.

A ``tal:condition`` statement does nothing if its expression has a true
value, but removes the entire statement tag, including its contents, if
the value is false. The ``odd`` and ``even`` properties of
``repeat/item`` are either zero or one. The number zero, a blank string,
an empty list, and the builtin variable ``nothing`` are all false
values. Nearly every other value is true, including non-zero numbers,
and strings with anything in them (even spaces!).

Defining Variables
------------------

Note: In Plone 4 or newer, use *container/value*\ s instead of
*container/objectValues* below.

Your template will always show at least one row, since the template
itself is one of the objects listed. In other circumstances, you might
want to account for the possibility that the table will be empty.
Suppose you want to simply omit the entire table in this case. You can
do this by adding a ``tal:condition`` to the table:

::

          <table border="1" width="100%"
                 tal:condition="container/objectValues">

Now, when there are no objects, no part of the table will be included in
the output. When there are objects, though, the expression
"container/objectValues" will be evaluated twice, which is mildly
inefficient. Also, if you wanted to change the expression, you would
have to change it in both places.

To avoid these problems, you can define a variable to hold the list, and
then use it in both the ``tal:condition`` and the ``tal:repeat``. Change
the first few lines of the table to look like this:

::

          <table border="1" width="100%"
                 tal:define="items container/objectValues"
                 tal:condition="items">
            <tr>
              <th>#</th><th>Id</th><th>Meta-Type</th><th>Title</th>
            </tr>
            <tbody tal:repeat="item items">

The ``tal:define`` statement creates the variable ``items``, and you can
use it anywhere in the table tag. Notice also how you can have two TAL
attributes on the same ``table`` tag. You can, in fact, have as many as
you want. In this case, they are evaluated in order. The first assigns
the variable ``items`` and the second uses ``items`` in a condition to
see whether or not it is false (in this case, an empty sequence) or
true.

Now, suppose that instead of simply leaving the table out when there are
no items, you want to show a message. To do this, you place the
following above the table:

::

          <h4 tal:condition="not:container/objectValues">There
          Are No Items</h4>

You can't use your ``items`` variable here, because it isn't defined
yet. If you move the definition to the ``h4`` tag, you can't use it in
the ``table`` tag any more, because it becomes a *local* variable of the
``h4`` tag. You could place the definition on some tag that enclosed
both the ``h4`` and the ``table``, but there is a simpler solution. By
placing the keyword ``global`` in front of the variable name, you can
make the definition last from the ``h4`` tag to the bottom of the
template:

::

          <h4 tal:define="global items container/objectValues"
              tal:condition="not:items">There Are No Items</h4>
          <table border="1" width="100%"
              tal:condition="items">

The ``not:`` in the first ``tal:condition`` is an expression type prefix
that can be placed in front of any expression. If the expression is
true, ``not:`` is false, and vice versa.

Changing Attributes
-------------------

Most, if not all, of the objects listed by your template have an
``icon`` property, that contains the path to the icon for that kind of
object. In order to show this icon in the meta-type column, you will
need to insert this path into the ``src`` attribute of an ``img`` tag,
by editing the meta-type column in both rows to look like this:

::

          <td>
              <img src="/misc_/OFSP/Folder_icon.gif"
                   tal:attributes="src item/icon">
              <span tal:replace="item/meta_type">Meta-Type</span>
          </td>

The ``tal:attributes`` statement replaces the ``src`` attribute of the
image with the value of ``item/icon``. The value of ``src`` in the
template acts as a placeholder, so that the image is not broken, and is
the correct size.

Since the ``tal:content`` attribute on the table cell would have
replaced the entire contents of the cell, including the image, with the
meta-type text, it had to be removed. Instead, you insert the meta-type
inline in the same fashion as the URL at the top of the page.

Based on the `Zope
Book <http://www.zope.org/Documentation/Books/ZopeBook/>`_, Â© `Zope
Corporation <http://www.zope.com/>`_
